Bitcoin has already witnessed a wider adoption and attention than any other digital currency proposed to date. One of the main reasons for such a broad adoption of Bitcoin has been a promise of a low-cost, anonymous, and decentralized currency that is inherently independent of governments and of any centralized authority {{ "bitcoinwiki" | cite }}

In this chapter, we analyze the (de-)centralized nature of Bitcoin and show that---contrary to widespread belief---Bitcoin is not a truly decentralized system as it is deployed and implemented today. %We find evidence for this in the current distribution of Bitcoin computing power and in the way that Bitcoin is administered.

Namely, in Bitcoin, the users ``vote'' with their computing power to prevent double-spending (i.e., by \emph{power-voting}) which effectively limits the power of individual users and makes Sybil attacks difficult. Given the huge computing power that is harnessed in the Bitcoin system (currently around 1'600'000 Tera hashes per second), users believe that it is unlikely for any entity to acquire such power alone, and control the network. However, even a quick look at the distribution of computing power in Bitcoin reveals that the power of dedicated ``miners'' far exceeds the power that individual users dedicate to mining, allowing few parties to effectively control the currency; currently the top-three (centrally managed) mining pools control more than 50\% of the computing power in Bitcoin.
Indeed, while mining and block generation in Bitcoin was originally designed to be decentralized, these processes are currently largely centralized.

On the other hand, other Bitcoin operations, like protocol updates and incident resolution are not designed to be decentralized, and are controlled by a small number of administrators whose influence does not depend on the computing power that they control but is rather derived from their function within the system. Bitcoin users do not have any direct influence over the appointment of the administrators---which is somewhat ironic since some of the Bitcoin users opt for Bitcoin in the hope of avoiding centralized control that is typically exercised over national currencies.

Furthermore, we note that Bitcoin introduces a level of transparency in terms of coin mining and spending since the transaction logs in Bitcoin are public and available for inspection by any interested party. However, it is not clear how any potential disputes would be resolved in Bitcoin since this would then require appropriate regulatory frameworks---a move which clearly goes against the very nature of Bitcoin.

We further observe that the existence of public logs in Bitcoin can have some negative effects on this currency which extend beyond known privacy concerns~\cite{bitcoinprivacy}. Bitcoin users can e.g., decide not to accept coins that appear to have originated from a particular address (i.e., that were mined by the owner of that address); since the use of any coin (or its fraction) can be traced back to its origin, this decision by the users will practically deflate the value of these coins, since other users become reluctant on accepting these coins as payments. We call this effect \emph{coin tainting} and postulate that it can have a negative effect on the use of Bitcoin as a currency.

Finally, we explore possible solutions and recommendations to enhance the decentralization in Bitcoin. We hope that our findings solicit further research in this area.

%In Section~\ref{sec:background}, we briefly describe the main operations in Bitcoin.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section~\ref{chap:decentralized:sec:centralized}, we
discuss the limits of decentralization in Bitcoin. In Section~\ref{chap:decentralized:sec:solutions}, we explore possible ways to enhance the decentralization of Bitcoin. We conclude in Section~\ref{chap:decentralized:sec:conclusion}.
